Add Airflow 3 development readme (#41457)
mistercrunch/Airflow: dev/README_AIRFLOW3_DEV.md

  - [Merging PRs for Airflow 3](#merging-prs-for-airflow-3)
  - [Merging PRs for Airflow 2.11](#merging-prs-for-airflow-211)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# Main branch is Airflow 3

The main branch is for development of Airflow 3.
Airflow 2.10.x releases will be cut from `v-2-10-stable` branch.

# Contributors

The following section explains which branches you should target your PR to

## Developing for providers and Helm chart

PRs should target `main` branch.
Make sure your code is only about Providers or Helm chart.
Avoid mixing core changes into the same PR

## Developing for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

If the PR is relevant for both Airflow 3 and 2 it should target `main` branch.

## Developing for Airflow 3

PRs should target `main` branch.

## Developing for Airflow 2.10.x

PR should target `v-2-10-test` branch. When cutting a new release for 2.10 release manager
will sync `v-2-10-test`  branch to `v-2-10-stable` and cut the release from the stable branch.
PR should never target `v-2-10-stable` unless specifically instructed by release manager.

## Developing for Airflow 2.11

> Version 2.11 is planned to be cut from `v-2-10-stable` branch.

Reviewer: I believe this one needs clarification - and it's very related to the questions that @uranusjr posted in https://lists.apache.org/thread/56b7bdrzszkqtd6kgy360okw72568ld2

Especially the point:

> - It also seems unproductive to hold off merging the PR until the 2.10 line is finished?

I think we need to have a way to somehow make it manageable to backport/have 2.11 - targetting PRs only.

This is missing now - we might have some PRs that are specifically targetting Airflow 2.11 and we do not want to merge then in 2.10, but they also do not make sense for Airflow 3 / main.

My proposal would be to cut-off `v-2-11-test` branch now (from the tip of the `v-2-10-test` and periodically rebase it on top of `v2-10-test`. This way we could have **SOME** PRs implemented in `v2-11-test` branch only .

Author: To my understanding 2.11 is meant to be bridge release... Thus it will not have features other than what is needed for the bridge functionality. Thus cutting it from 2.10 branch make sense.

Reviewer: As discussed - I am fine with this approach as long as we have an explicit separate thread explaining it / vote on devlist as so far this only have been discussed but never voted on and I think we should be very explicit about it.

- [Main branch is Airflow 3](#main-branch-is-airflow-3)
- [Contributors](#contributors)
  - [Developing for providers and Helm chart](#developing-for-providers-and-helm-chart)
  - [Developing for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x](#developing-for-airflow-3-and-210x--211x)
  - [Developing for Airflow 3](#developing-for-airflow-3)
  - [Developing for Airflow 2.10.x](#developing-for-airflow-210x)
  - [Developing for Airflow 2.11](#developing-for-airflow-211)
- [Committers / PMCs](#committers--pmcs)
  - [Merging PRs for providers and Helm chart](#merging-prs-for-providers-and-helm-chart)
  - [Merging PR for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x](#merging-pr-for-airflow-3-and-210x--211x)
  - [Merging PRs 2.10.x](#merging-prs-210x)
  - [Merging PRs for Airflow 3](#merging-prs-for-airflow-3)
  - [Merging PRs for Airflow 2.11](#merging-prs-for-airflow-211)
- [Milestones for PR](#milestones-for-pr)
  - [Set 2.10.x milestone](#set-210x-milestone)
  - [Set 2.11 milestone](#set-211-milestone)
  - [Set 3 milestone](#set-3-milestone)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# Main branch is Airflow 3

The main branch is for development of Airflow 3.

> Airflow 2.10.x releases will be cut from `v-2-10-stable` branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Airflow 2.10.x releases will be cut from `v2-10-stable` branch.
```

# Contributors

The following section explains which branches you should target your PR to

## Developing for providers and Helm chart

PRs should target `main` branch.
Make sure your code is only about Providers or Helm chart.
Avoid mixing core changes into the same PR

## Developing for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

> If the PR is relevant for both Airflow 3 and 2 it should target `main` branch.

Reviewer 3: Do we/shall we define a label to mark PRs which are going into both? Plus shall we add a note for contributors coming along?

```suggestion
If the PR is relevant for both Airflow 3 and 2 it should target `main` branch.

Note that Airflow 2 is not planned having a feature release other than a bridge release. If you plan to add features you should align with contributors first.
```

Author: Please check the updated doc
I improved this part with the mental model

## Developing for Airflow 3

PRs should target `main` branch.

## Developing for Airflow 2.10.x

> PR should target `v-2-10-test` branch. When cutting a new release for 2.10 release manager
> will sync `v-2-10-test`  branch to `v-2-10-stable` and cut the release from the stable branch.
> PR should never target `v-2-10-stable` unless specifically instructed by release manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PR should target `v2-10-test` branch. When cutting a new release for 2.10 release manager
will sync `v2-10-test`  branch to `v2-10-stable` and cut the release from the stable branch.
PR should never target `v2-10-stable` unless specifically instructed by release manager.
```

## Developing for Airflow 2.11

> Version 2.11 is planned to be cut from `v-2-10-stable` branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Version 2.11 is planned to be cut from `v2-10-stable` branch.
```

The version will contain features relevant as bridge release for Airflow 3.
We will not backport otherwise features from main branch to 2.11
Note that 2.11 policy may change as 2.11 become closer

# Committers / PMCs

The following section explains the protocol for merging PRs.

## Merging PRs for providers and Helm chart

Make sure PR target `main` branch.
Avoid merging PRs that involves providers + core / helm chart + core
Core part should be extracted to separated PR.
Exclusions should be pre-approved specifically with a comment by release manager.
Do not treat PR approval (Green V) as exclusion approval.

## Merging PR for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

The committer who merge the PR is responsible for back-porting the PR to `v-2-10-test`.
This means start a new PR where the original commit from main is cherry-picked and conflicts resolved.
If cherry-pick is too complex then ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v-2-10-test` directly with the change.
Note: tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.

> Committer may also request from PR author to raise 2 PRs one against `main` branch and one against `v-2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change.

Reviewer 3: As I was stumbling about this and not easy to trace? (or how) - Should the Cherry-pick PR always mention the original PR which was made towards v3/main?

Reviewer: cherry-pick -x will keep reference to the cherry-picked commit

Reviewer: (and the commit message will contain the original PR# becayuse it becomes part of the subject after it is "squash-merged"

Reviewer: I think we should add a short instruction here for contributors on "how to backport" - that we can direct people to. Wee question from @amoghrajesh https://github.com/apache/airflow/pull/41665#issuecomment-2304968153 

And answering @amoghrajesh -> yes we should cherry-pick with `-x` - it does not move the hash it just mentions the original commit hash in the message "cherry-picked from HASH" - so this merely links the two commits.

> The committer who merge the PR is responsible for back-porting the PR to `v-2-10-test`.
> This means start a new PR where the original commit from main is cherry-picked and conflicts resolved.
> If cherry-pick is too complex then ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v-2-10-test` directly with the change.
> Note: tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.
> 
> Committer may also request from PR author to raise 2 PRs one against `main` branch and one against `v-2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The committer who merge the PR is responsible for back-porting the PR to `v2-10-test`.
This means start a new PR where the original commit from main is cherry-picked and conflicts resolved.
If cherry-pick is too complex then ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v2-10-test` directly with the change.
Note: tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.

Committer may also request from PR author to raise 2 PRs one against `main` branch and one against `v2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change.
```

> Committer may also request from PR author to raise 2 PRs one against `main` branch and one against `v-2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change.

Reviewer 3: Should we add a note here that backporting new features is to be aligned with other committers or shall be made only in exceptional cases?

Author: can you clarify what do you mean by aligned?
The idea of this section is to provide suggestion how committer can make sure the code landed in both main and v-2-10-test.

Reviewer 3: I mean we "intend" to just deliver bugfixes in 2.10 and no new features. There might be areas where you could debate if it is a small feature along a bugfix or a small small feature that might be acceptable in a patch release.

How hard is the limit if these "gray zone" of feature request into 2.10 line comes along?

Reviewer 3: ...but I see the current text also covers this what I was thinking about... so ignore my comment. Thanks :-D

## Merging PRs 2.10.x

Suggested change

> Make sure PR target `v-2-10-test` branch and merge it when ready.
> Make sure your PRs target the `v-2-10-test` branch, and it can be merged when ready.
> All regular protocols of merging considerations are applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure PR target `v2-10-test` branch and merge it when ready.
Make sure your PRs target the `v2-10-test` branch, and it can be merged when ready.
All regular protocols of merging considerations are applied.
```

## Merging PRs for Airflow 3

Make sure PR target `main` branch.

### PRs that involve breaking changes

Make sure it has newsfragment, please allow time for community members to review.
Our goal is to avoid breaking changes if we can so we should allow time to review, don't rush to merge.

## Merging PRs for Airflow 2.11

TBD

> # Milestones for PR

Reviewer 3: Oh, just also came across this - we should define this to check for consistency. If the "first" PR is made with the target to be cherry-picked to 2.10 should the first PR or the cherry-pick contain the milestone label?

Author: I don't know :)
We didn't decide what to do with milestones yet. @potiuk brought this today in Slack.

We decided to discuss this PR/doc in the next call... I set these pargraphs so we win't miss it

1. You must clarify what is the urgency (why it can't wait for Airflow 3)
2. You need be willing to deliver the feature for both main branch and Airflow 2.11 branch
3. You must be willing to provide support future bug fixes as needed.

Points to consider on how PMC members evaluate the request of exception:

1. Feature impact. Is it really urgent? How many are affected?
2. Are there any workarounds?
3. Scope of change. Both in code lines / number of files and components changed.
4. Is the feature at the heart of Airflow (scheduler, dag parser) or peripheral.
5. Identity of the requester. Is the request from/supported by a member of the community?
6. Similar previous cases approved.
7. Other considerations that may raise by PMC members depending on the case.

## Developing for Airflow 3

PRs should target `main` branch.

## Developing for Airflow 2.10.x

PR should target `v2-10-test` branch. When cutting a new release for 2.10 release manager
will sync `v2-10-test`  branch to `v2-10-stable` and cut the release from the stable branch.
PR should never target `v2-10-stable` unless specifically instructed by release manager.

## Developing for Airflow 2.11

> Version 2.11 is planned to be cut from `v2-10-stable` branch.

Reviewer 3: To we need to put PRs for 2.11 "on hold" so that they are not mixed-up with other patches while we are maintaining 2.10 (and not ready for all stuff being ready in 2.11)?

Reviewer: My proposal would be to have a v2-11-test branch where they will get merged, intitially cut-off from v2-10-test, and rebasing that branch when we release patchlevel versions of 2.10.0 (I.e. rebase v2-11-test on top of v2-10-test after every patchlevel is released.

The version will contain features relevant as bridge release for Airflow 3.
We will not backport otherwise features from main branch to 2.11
Note that 2.11 policy may change as 2.11 become closer

# Committers / PMCs

The following section explains the protocol for merging PRs.

## Merging PRs for providers and Helm chart

Make sure PR target `main` branch.
Avoid merging PRs that involves providers + core / helm chart + core
Core part should be extracted to separated PR.
Exclusions should be pre-approved specifically with a comment by release manager.
Do not treat PR approval (Green V) as exclusion approval.

## Merging PR for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

The committer who merge the PR is responsible for back-porting the PR to `v2-10-test`.
This means start a new PR where the original commit from main is cherry-picked and conflicts resolved.
If cherry-pick is too complex then ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v2-10-test` directly with the change.
Note: tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.

> Committer may also request from PR author to raise 2 PRs one against `main` branch and one against `v2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Committer may also request from PR author to raise 2 PRs one against `main` branch and one against `v2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change.

Mistakes happen and such backport PR work might fall through cracks, so PRs that the committer thinks should be back-ported, should get 2.10.x milestone set.

This way release manager can verify (as usual) if all the "expected" PRs have been backported and cherry-pick remainig PRS.
```

ALso - one small comment here:

> Committer may also request from PR author to raise 2 PRs one against `main` branch and one against `v-2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change.

I think - as described -  it this is really crucial to ask befor merge and make it condition of merging the PR, because otherwise it might or might not happen and tracking what happens will make it quite a heavy cognitive load - also we need a "safety net" - some PRs will be missing/lost/not merged etc - the only way to track the "candidates" is to mark them with the milestone and have release manager to verify if all have been merged.

And inveitably mistakes happen and things will be lost - so we should also make sure that

- [Main branch is Airflow 3](#main-branch-is-airflow-3)
- [Contributors](#contributors)
  - [Developing for providers and Helm chart](#developing-for-providers-and-helm-chart)
  - [Developing for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x](#developing-for-airflow-3-and-210x--211x)
  - [Developing for Airflow 3](#developing-for-airflow-3)
  - [Developing for Airflow 2.10.x](#developing-for-airflow-210x)
  - [Developing for Airflow 2.11](#developing-for-airflow-211)
- [Committers / PMCs](#committers--pmcs)
  - [Merging PRs for providers and Helm chart](#merging-prs-for-providers-and-helm-chart)
  - [Merging PR for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x](#merging-pr-for-airflow-3-and-210x--211x)
  - [Merging PRs 2.10.x](#merging-prs-210x)
  - [Merging PRs for Airflow 3](#merging-prs-for-airflow-3)
  - [Merging PRs for Airflow 2.11](#merging-prs-for-airflow-211)
- [Milestones for PR](#milestones-for-pr)
  - [Set 2.10.x milestone](#set-210x-milestone)
  - [Set 2.11 milestone](#set-211-milestone)
  - [Set 3 milestone](#set-3-milestone)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# Main branch is Airflow 3

The main branch is for development of Airflow 3.

> Airflow 2.10.x releases will be cut from `v2-10-stable` branch.

Reviewer 4: Later in the document you also refer to 2.11 - maybe worth mentioning here?

# Contributors

> The following section explains which branches you should target your PR to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following section explains to which branches you should target your PR.
```

## Developing for providers and Helm chart

PRs should target `main` branch.
Make sure your code is only about Providers or Helm chart.
Avoid mixing core changes into the same PR

## Developing for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

> If the PR is relevant for both Airflow 3 and 2 it should target `main` branch.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the PR is relevant for both Airflow 3 and 2, it should target `main` branch.
```

Note: The mental model of Airflow 2.11 is bridge release for Airflow 3.
As a result, Airflow 2.11 is not planned to introduce new features other than ones relevant as bridge release for Airflow 3.
That said, we recognize that there may be exceptions.

> If you believe a specific feature is must have for Airflow 2.11 you need to raise this as discussion thread in the mailing list.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you believe a specific feature is a must-have for Airflow 2.11, you'll need to raise this as discussion thread on the mailing list.
```

Points to address to make your case:

1. You must clarify what is the urgency (why it can't wait for Airflow 3)
2. You need be willing to deliver the feature for both main branch and Airflow 2.11 branch

> 3. You must be willing to provide support future bug fixes as needed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. You must clarify what is the urgency (i.e., why it can't wait for Airflow 3).
2. You need be willing to deliver the feature for both main branch and Airflow 2.11 branch.
3. You must be willing to provide support future bug fixes as needed.
```

Points to consider on how PMC members evaluate the request of exception:

1. Feature impact. Is it really urgent? How many are affected?
2. Are there any workarounds?
3. Scope of change. Both in code lines / number of files and components changed.
4. Is the feature at the heart of Airflow (scheduler, dag parser) or peripheral.
5. Identity of the requester. Is the request from/supported by a member of the community?
6. Similar previous cases approved.

> 7. Other considerations that may raise by PMC members depending on the case.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Feature impact - Is it really urgent? How many are affected?
2. Workarounds - Are there any ?
3. Scope of change -  Both in code lines / number of files and components changed.
4. Centrality - Is the feature at the heart of Airflow (Scheduler, DAG parser) or peripheral.
5. Identity of the requester - Is the request from/supported by a member of the community?
6. Similar previous cases approved.
7. Other considerations that may raise by PMC members depending on the case.
```

## Developing for Airflow 3

PRs should target `main` branch.

## Developing for Airflow 2.10.x

> PR should target `v2-10-test` branch. When cutting a new release for 2.10 release manager
> will sync `v2-10-test`  branch to `v2-10-stable` and cut the release from the stable branch.
> PR should never target `v2-10-stable` unless specifically instructed by release manager.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
PR should target `v2-10-test` branch. When cutting a new release for 2.10, release manager
will sync `v2-10-test` branch to `v2-10-stable` and cut the release from the stable branch.
PR should never target `v2-10-stable` unless specifically instructed by release manager.
```

## Developing for Airflow 2.11

Version 2.11 is planned to be cut from `v2-10-stable` branch.
The version will contain features relevant as bridge release for Airflow 3.
We will not backport otherwise features from main branch to 2.11

> Note that 2.11 policy may change as 2.11 become closer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that 2.11 policy may change as 2.11 becomes closer.
```

# Committers / PMCs

> The following section explains the protocol for merging PRs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This section explains the protocol for merging PRs.
```
 
(or `the following subsections` :) )

## Merging PRs for providers and Helm chart

Make sure PR target `main` branch.
Avoid merging PRs that involves providers + core / helm chart + core
Core part should be extracted to separated PR.
Exclusions should be pre-approved specifically with a comment by release manager.

> Do not treat PR approval (Green V) as exclusion approval.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Make sure PR targets `main` branch..
Avoid merging PRs that involve providers + core / helm chart + core.
Core part should be extracted to a separated PR.
Exclusions should be pre-approved specifically with a comment by release manager.
Do not treat PR approval (Green V) as exclusion approval.
```

## Merging PR for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

The committer who merge the PR is responsible for back-porting the PR to `v2-10-test`.
This means start a new PR where the original commit from main is cherry-picked and conflicts resolved.
If cherry-pick is too complex then ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v2-10-test` directly with the change.

> Note: tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The committer who merges the PR is responsible for backporting the PR to `v2-10-test`.
It means that they should create a new PR where the original commit from main is cherry-picked and take care for resolving conflicts.
If the cherry-pick is too complex, then ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v2-10-test` directly with the change.
Note: tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.
```

> Committer may also request from PR author to raise 2 PRs one against `main` branch and one against `v2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Committer may also request from the PR author to raise 2 PRs at the same time: one against `main` branch, and one against `v2-10-test` prior to accepting the code change in the former.
```

> Mistakes happen and such backport PR work might fall through cracks, so PRs that the committer thinks should be back-ported, should get 2.10.x milestone set.
> 
> This way release manager can verify (as usual) if all the "expected" PRs have been backported and cherry-pick remaining PRS.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Mistakes happen, and such backport PR work might fall through cracks. Therefore, if the committer thinks that certain PRs should be backported, they should set 2.10.x milestone for them.

This way release manager can verify (as usual) if all the "expected" PRs have been backported and cherry-pick remaining PRS.
```

## Merging PRs 2.10.x

Suggested change
Make sure PR target `v2-10-test` branch and merge it when ready.

> Make sure your PRs target the `v2-10-test` branch, and it can be merged when ready.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Make sure your PRs target the `v2-10-test` branch, and it can be merged when ready.
```
Wasn't sure regarding the purpose of the first two lines :)

All regular protocols of merging considerations are applied.

## Merging PRs for Airflow 3

> Make sure PR target `main` branch.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Make sure PR targets `main` branch.
```

### PRs that involve breaking changes

> Make sure it has newsfragment, please allow time for community members to review.
> Our goal is to avoid breaking changes if we can so we should allow time to review, don't rush to merge.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our goal is to avoid breaking changes whenever possible. Therefore, we should allow time for community members to review PRs that contain such changes - please avoid rushing to merge them. In addition, ensure that these PRs include a newsfragment.
```

The main branch is for development of Airflow 3.
Airflow 2.10.x releases will be cut from `v-2-10-stable` branch.

# Developing for providers and Helm chart

PRs should target `main` branch.

# Developing for Airflow 3

PRs should target `main` branch.

# Developing for Airflow 2.10.x

PR should target `v-2-10-test` branch. When cutting a new release for 2.10 release manager
will sync `v-2-10-test`  branch to `v-2-10-stable` and cut the release from the stable branch.
PR should never target `v-2-10-stable` unless specifically instructed by release manager.

# Developing for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

If the PR is relevant for both Airflow 3 and 2 it should target `main` branch.

# Merging PRs 2.10.x

Make sure PR target `v-2-10-test` branch and merge it when ready.
All regular protocols of merging considerations are applied.

# Merging PRs for Airflow 3

Make sure PR target `main` branch.

## PRs that involve breaking changes

Make sure it has newsfragment, please allow time for community members to review.
Our goal is to avoid breaking changes if we can so we should allow time to review, don't rush to merge.

# Merging PR for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

> The committer who merge the PR is responsible for cherry pick the PR to `v-2-10-test`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The committer who merge the PR is responsible for back-porting the PR to `v-2-10-test` (opening a new PR where original change gets cherry-picked and conflicts resolved). 
```

> The committer who merge the PR is responsible for cherry pick the PR to `v-2-10-test`
> If cherry pick is too complex then ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v-2-10-test` directly with the change.
> Note: tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The committer who merged the PR is responsible for cherry picking the PR to `v-2-10-test`.
If cherry picking is too complex, ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v-2-10-test` directly with the change.
Note: Tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.
```

Nit on syntax.

Does _cherry picking_ in the first line means the committer should just do something like `git cherry-pick <pr-commit> v-2-10-test` and push, or should the cherry-picking change be sent as a PR?

Reviewer: I did cherry-picking originall  following the original description but as explained by @ephraimbuddy in  https://apache-airflow.slack.com/archives/C03G9H97MM2/p1723409003786549  - we have "branch-protection" enabled for v2-10-test, so the only way is to make PR against v2-10-test.

@ephraimbuddy @utkarsharma2 -> do I understand correctly? Was that the intention here?

It is quite a burden on the committer merging change (however it makes release manager's job much easier) - and there are pros and cons. 

For one they might meke people more hesitant to merge PRs when they **should** be also backported, because rather than clicking a button and setting a label, it requires them to actually backport the change and possibly resolve conflicts (which so far was release manager's job).

But also yes, it allows to more easily gate and make sure that what's get "backported" is verified and approved by someone else, it's not an individual decision.

I am quite ok with the burden, as long as all committers are aware of that. I thknk if we do not communicate it explicitly and explain that this is "expectation" - we might end up with people having different expectation and not making such PRs - because they will think it will somehow "magically" happen.

Reviewer: (and yes cherry-picker was planned for it but I am not sure if this will work with branch protection and how it will look like - and whether we have someone working on it).

Author: As far as I remember we didn't have test branches protected before

Reviewer: > As far as I remember we didn't have test branches protected before

Correct. This is a change I've learned from the thread I linked above - I think we have not discussed it (or at least I can't remember discussion about that in any place).

Reviewer 6: @ephraimbuddy added it here https://github.com/apache/airflow/commit/06d6ecadffe7734e8758cf0067c73fd81d73c355

Proposal was for the PR author to raise it if they want to guarantee inclusion of a bugfix in 2.x -- otherwise it is on the committer who merges it. (Although yeah branch protection with cherry-picking needs approval so pros/cons)

Reviewer: Side comment: 

Maybe it's just me but I think `cherry-picking` use is misleading if we have "branch protection" (at least that was what made me cherry-pick directly to v2-10-test). 

Possibly we should use "back-porting PR" term from now on - because cherry-picking commits directly to branch is "easier" and can be done  in bulk (even 100s of commits) with very little overhead (if no conflicts found). Creating a PR for each commit that you want to back-port and getting them approved, tests passing and merging. is quite a bit more overhead (also it involves breaking the flow  and context switching as it has to wait for CI and approval) - so I'd say "back-porting" is a better way to describe it, even if it starts with creating new branch and running `git cherry-pick -x`.

Also realisticly speaking - I think it will be quite problematic to expect contributor to raise yet another PR to a different branch. Just explaining and guiding contributors to do so and dealing with backporting issues it might cause, might take more time than just creating such backport PR.

Reviewer 6: >Maybe it's just me but I think cherry-picking use is misleading if we have "branch protection" (at least that was what made me cherry-pick directly to v2-10-test).

Yeah, agreed with cherry-picking and branch-protection issue.

>Also realisticly speaking - I think it will be quite problematic to expect contributor to raise yet another PR to a different branch. Just explaining and guiding contributors to do so and dealing with backporting issues it might cause, might take more time than just creating such backport PR.

Our language on that I think is good enough: "If there are merge conflicts, the committer should add a comment on the original PR, informing the author and asking them
to raise a separate PR against ``v2-10-test`` branch. If this doesn't happen, there is no guarantee that the PR will be part of 2.10.x"

Only the PR author will have the entire context of language, and they might be the best person. The person merging can make their own judgement call I think based on that guideline. For example, if they are willing to do it, they can do it rather than asking the PR author

Reviewer: Yeah it is . As long as we replace "cherry-picking" in all the places by "backporting the PR against v2-10-test branch" or something. It's all clear (though it needs to be iterated and reminded a few times at devlist and #contributing channel I think - a lot of things is happening and it's easy to miss that important expectation.

Reviewer 2: The problem with "cherry-picking" directly to the test branch without raising a PR is that we would run into the issue of someone force-pushing and removing someone else's commits. If there's another way to make it so we don't raise a PR and don't force push to v2-10-test, that would be better.

Author: > The problem with "cherry-picking" directly to the test branch without raising a PR is that we would run into the issue of someone force-pushing and removing someone else's commits.

that is a good point

Reviewer: If the only problem is overriding each-other's pushes - Github allows to protect branches and not allow force-push - it would require to add this feature to .asf.yml - similarly as i did with unresolved conversations - because I think i't's not supported now by the infrastructure:

https://github.com/apache/infrastructure-p6/pull/1740

It's rather easy - so if we think it's worth it maybe someone can raise a PR there ? Infra team is happy to accept such changes.

But I think - even if it makes things slower -  it's worth gating it, also if we have a need to bulk-cherry-pick PRs we could potentialy open a "bulk" PR and cherry-pick mutlitple commits (and then move the tag after approval rather than merge it from UI - whicih will keep the history and avoid squashing those commits).

Reviewer 2: Just want to mention that from how the [cherrypicker](https://pypi.org/project/cherry_picker/) works, the branches don't allow direct pushes but PRs of cherry-picked commits: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/122312.

Reviewer: Yeah. Having cherry-picker configured would save a bit of the overhead - looking how it works making the process more applicable even to contributors.

Author: Is this something we want to open for discussion in the next call or do we have alignment here?

Reviewer 6: I think we have an alignment. wdyt @ephraimbuddy @potiuk ?

Reviewer: Absolutely

Author: updated

 KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
 specific language governing permissions and limitations
 under the License.
-->
<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of contents**

- [Main branch is Airflow 3](#main-branch-is-airflow-3)
- [Contributors](#contributors)
  - [Developing for providers and Helm chart](#developing-for-providers-and-helm-chart)
  - [Developing for Airflow 3](#developing-for-airflow-3)
  - [Developing for Airflow 2.10.x](#developing-for-airflow-210x)
  - [Developing for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x](#developing-for-airflow-3-and-210x--211x)
- [Committers / PMCs](#committers--pmcs)
  - [Merging PRs 2.10.x](#merging-prs-210x)
  - [Merging PRs for Airflow 3](#merging-prs-for-airflow-3)
  - [Merging PR for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x](#merging-pr-for-airflow-3-and-210x--211x)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# Main branch is Airflow 3

The main branch is for development of Airflow 3.
Airflow 2.10.x releases will be cut from `v-2-10-stable` branch.

# Contributors

> The following section explains which branch you should target your PR

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The following section explains which branches you should target your PRs to
```

## Developing for providers and Helm chart

PRs should target `main` branch.

## Developing for Airflow 3

PRs should target `main` branch.

## Developing for Airflow 2.10.x

PR should target `v-2-10-test` branch. When cutting a new release for 2.10 release manager
will sync `v-2-10-test`  branch to `v-2-10-stable` and cut the release from the stable branch.
PR should never target `v-2-10-stable` unless specifically instructed by release manager.

## Developing for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

> If the PR is relevant for both Airflow 3 and 2 it should target `main` branch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the PR is relevant for both Airflow 3 and 2 it should target `main` branch.
It is the responsibility of the committer to ensure it will be back-ported to `v-2-10-test` maintenance branch (but help by contributor is appreciated).
```

Reviewer 3: Note, I'd favor to bring this chapter before the "Developing for Airflow 2.10.x" as this should be favored compared to only contributing to 2.10.x line in my view. Especially bugfixes.

> # Committers / PMCs

Reviewer 3: You have cut the description per role, should we not rather have the role specific description in the chapter per use case? I see the 4 chapters (providera+helm, v3, v3+2, v2) leading and then the way of working for contributor and maintainer could be close together.

The following section explains the protocol for merging PRs.

> ## Merging PRs 2.10.x

Reviewer 3: Alongside with comment above - if not merged - then at least I'd recommend to order in the same direction like for contributors.

> Make sure PR target `v-2-10-test` branch and merge it when ready.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Make sure your PRs target the `v-2-10-test` branch and it can be merged when ready.
```

All regular protocols of merging considerations are applied.

## Merging PRs for Airflow 3

Make sure PR target `main` branch.

### PRs that involve breaking changes

Make sure it has newsfragment, please allow time for community members to review.
Our goal is to avoid breaking changes if we can so we should allow time to review, don't rush to merge.

## Merging PR for Airflow 3 and 2.10.x / 2.11.x

The committer who merge the PR is responsible for back-porting the PR to `v-2-10-test` (opening a new PR where original change gets cherry-picked and conflicts resolved).
If cherry pick is too complex then ask the PR author / start your own PR against `v-2-10-test` directly with the change.

> Note: tracking that the PRs merged as expected is the responsibility of committer who merged the PR.

Reviewer 7: Its the committer or the PR owner?

Author: committer is responsible. Should he delegate it to PR author or someone else that is OK but committer is still responsible for tracking and making sure it happens
